I have two main points of feedback on this class.  The first is that I found
that the quizzes were rather poorly written.  A very large percentage of the
questions were ambiguous.  For instance, "which line has more area, a
vertical/horizontal line or a diagonal line," with no reference to endpoints,
or questions that ask which of some options is "best," without defining what
best means.  The quizzes were littered with ambiguous wording, which I found
unfortunate and unnecessary given that we have precise mathematical language at
our disposal in this discipline.

My second point is that the grading incentives were not calculated to maximize
the learning of the students.  Students almost always figure out the minimum
they need to do to get their desired grade in the class, and do that much and
nothing more.  Posting previous quizzes online and giving really large amounts
of extra credit on projects, while students really appreciate it, does not
create an incentive to learn anything.  For example, I paid a lot of attention
in class and studied a fair amount for the first quiz, and I got an A.  The
next three quizzes I thought I did the same preparation, but I averaged a B on
them (mostly because of the ambiguity problems mentioned above).  So I stopped
paying attention in class (and didn't even go the last three weeks), and just
read the old quizzes online and went to the review session for the last three
quizzes, and I averaged a 90%.  I couldn't really tell you anything at all
about how to implement Bezier or B-spline curves, or how to do ray-tracing, but
because I read the old quizzes I was able to get an A- on the quizzes.

Also, the extra credit on the projects made the class incredibly easy.  I
appreciate the intent to allow students to earn more credit for doing more than
is required in implementing the OpenGL spec.  However, when for projects 3 and
4 you can get 100 points on the project by doing hardly anything more than
looking at the man pages for the functions and copying their matrices, you
don't really learn anything about implementing a graphics library.  Especially
when the projects are worth 50% of the overall grade, and it's not hard at all
to get 105% or more on the projects (as extra credit is retroactively applied),
you can average a 70% or worse on the quizzes and still have an A in the class.

Now, this all said, I thought the grading scheme was rather nice, because I was
able to finish the projects early, get a lot of easy extra credit, stop going
to class, and still get an A.  But my A doesn't mean that I actually learned
anything.  At least certainly not as much as the course outline would suggest
that I know having gotten an A.  I suppose that's what grade inflation is,
isn't it?
