How did you choose your field and what are your primary expectations of your
future career?

My father, grandfather, and great-grandfather all earned PhDs in physics.  I
grew up wanting to be a physicist, to win the Nobel Prize by discovering a
Unified Field Theory.  When I started college, however, I discovered the
fascinating field of computer science and quickly changed my major, though I
still maintained interest in physics and acquired a strong background in both
physics and mathematics.  Having some experience as a Spanish-English
interpreter, I was enthralled with the idea of machine interpretation -- speech
recognition, machine translation, and speech synthesis to have live speech
interpreted between languages.  Now, with much more experience in the field, I
am continually amazed by the kinds of problems that can be solved with computer
science, many of which have the potential to dramatically improve the lives of
millions of people.  I want to help solve those problems and make our society a
better place to live.

I envision my future career as one of research, likely in the domain of natural
language processing, though possibly also in computer vision or other areas of
machine learning.  I have not yet decided between research in industry or
academia; perhaps my career will take me first to industry, ending up as a
professor later in life.  I have spent some time as a teaching assistant, and I
feel that I would enjoy teaching students of all the interesting problems there
are in computer science, getting them excited to do research in the field.  But
what I most want from my career is to find new problems to solve that will
better society, then solve them.  Things like machine translation and
interpretation, or extracting knowledge from large collections of text and
making that knowledge accessible to people, are intriguing problems that I
would love to spend my life's work on.

