Include here information about your favored extracurricular and leisure time
activities since your graduation from high school.

Of the many extracurricular and leisure time activities I have enjoyed since
high school, two stick out to me the most.  The first is a love of languages
and learning languages.  I spent two years as a missionary, during which time I
learned Spanish and did a lot of interpreting between Spanish and English; that
is when my love of language began.  As a computer scientist, I understood the
potential of computers to assist in my language learning, so I wrote several
programs to help me learn.  Much of my free time is spent using, maintaining
and improving those programs.  I have not only used those programs for learning
Spanish, however.  Since meeting my wife, I have become conversationally
competent, though still far from fluent, in Slovene, as my wife speaks that
language.  Much of our conversation is in Slovene.  I am also in my third
semester of ancient Greek, which I am taking simply for the enjoyment of
learning the language and to be able to read materials written in it.  On a
national test for second semester Greek students that I took for the fun of it,
I was the top scorer at BYU and one of the highest scoring students nationally.
One of my goals is to be able to read the first book of Harry Potter in ancient
Greek, just because it would be fun.  I simply enjoy learning, and language in
particular is fascinating to me.

The second leisure activity that I enjoy is spending time with my family.  I
have been happily married for almost two years, and my wife and I have an
eight-month-old daughter.  It is hard to describe the feeling of love and
belonging that comes from being with my family.  Making my daughter laugh
brings joy to my heart.  My family brings purpose and meaning to a life that
would otherwise be devoid of any real happiness.  I try to spend as much of my
free time as I can doing fun things with my family.
