How do your proposed field of study and career constitute an application of the
physical sciences or engineering?

The field of machine learning, and natural language processing especially,
relies heavily on developments made first in physics.  Physicists trying to
model what goes on in complicated atomic and molecular systems discovered new
statistical techniques that have since been used in many fields.  In more
recent times, computer scientists trying to deal with large amounts of data
have turned to those same techniques, such as Gibbs sampling and maximum
entropy Markov models.

Many fields of computer science are very obviously applications of the physical
sciences, as they deal with building robots, analyzing medical images, or
building three dimensional models of objects from video.  Machine learning, the
broad field of study I wish to pursue, is found in all of those applications,
and heavily relies on statistics and probability theory.  Natural language
processing, my current focus and a sub-field of machine learning, may at first
be seen as a non-physical science, relating more closely to linguistics.
However, as the field matures the methods used increasingly draw from the
physical sciences, relying on more advanced statistical techniques to solve
more complicated problems.  I am confident this trend towards applying methods
developed in other fields to natural language processing will continue, and
that is a large part of the reason I gained a strong background in physics and
mathematics.  I plan to continue strengthening my mathematical knowledge so
that I can help drive the field of natural language processing forward using
these techniques.


